Improve terminology page (#18441)
solana-labs/solana: docs/src/terminology.md

## account

A record in the Solana ledger that either holds data or is an executable program.

> Like an account at a traditional bank, a Solana account may hold funds called [lamports](terminology.md#lamport). Like a file in Linux, it is addressable by a [key](terminology.md#public-key) (public key or pubkey).

Reviewer: > it is addressable by a [key](terminology.md#public-key) (public key or pubkey).

This part is not quite right.  An account address may be one of:
1. an ed25519 public key
2. a program-derived account address (32byte value forced off the ed25519 curve)
3. a hash of an ed25519 public key with a 32 character string

## account owner

> The public key of the program that owns the account. Only the owning program is capable of modifying the account.

Reviewer: "public key" -> "address"

## account

A record in the Solana ledger that either holds data or is an executable program.

Like an account at a traditional bank, a Solana account may hold funds called [lamports](terminology.md#lamport). Like a file in Linux, it is addressable by a [key](terminology.md#public-key) (public key or pubkey).

## account owner

> The public key (pubkey) that owns an account.

Reviewer 2: This entire paragraph can be simplified.

```
The public key of the program that owns the account. Only the owning program is capable of modifying the account.
```

## blockhash

A unique value ([hash](terminology.md#hash)) that identifies a record (block).  Solana computes a blockhash from the last [entry id](terminology.md#entry-id) of the block.

## block height

The number of [blocks](terminology.md#block) beneath the current block. The first block after the [genesis block](terminology.md#genesis-block) has height one.

## bootstrap validator

The server node ([validator](terminology.md#validator)) that produces the genesis (first) [block](terminology.md#block) of a block chain.

## CBC block

> Thee smallest encrypted chunk of ledger, an encrypted ledger segment would be made of many CBC blocks. `ledger_segment_size / cbc_block_size` to be exact.

Reviewer 2: typo

Author: whoops...tx

Author: hey Jon...was wondering if u could confirm with me that the term 'instruction' in Solana refers solely/commonly to code that a transaction uses to interface with a deployed program (smart contract).    In other words, we should try to refrain from using the term 'instruction' when referring to code in a smart contract.

If so, as such, the existing definition below is incorrect because it infers that a CPI can be made from a transaction whereas in fact CPI calls are only made from other smart contracts, not transactions.

I'll push through what i think is better here but please advise.

## instruction

The smallest unit of a [program](terminology.md#program) that a [client](terminology.md#client) can include in a [transaction](terminology.md#transaction). Within its processing code, an instruction may contain one or more [cross-program invocations](terminology.md#cross-program-invocation).

Reviewer 2: The description in the definition is correct.
An instruction is the interface used to call programs both from transactions and to make CPI calls.
An instruction contains as its data the program it wishes to call, the accounts it wants to read or modify, and a data field that the program can use as inputs.

Author: thanks Jon...i will update this to reflect that an instruction as you say is " the interface used to call programs"

Please note that this also corrects the current documentation which infers that instructions exist solely in the realm of a transaction...excerpt from existing definition: "The smallest unit of a program that a client can include in a transaction"

## blockhash

A unique value ([hash](terminology.md#hash)) that identifies a record (block).  Solana computes a blockhash from the last [entry id](terminology.md#entry-id) of the block.

## block height

The number of [blocks](terminology.md#block) beneath the current block. The first block after the [genesis block](terminology.md#genesis-block) has height one.

## bootstrap validator

> The server node ([validator](terminology.md#validator)) that produces the genesis (first) [block](terminology.md#block) of a block chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [validator](terminology.md#validator) that produces the genesis (first) [block](terminology.md#block) of a block chain.
```

## blockhash

> A fingerprint ([hash](terminology.md#hash)) that identifies a record (block).  Solana computes a blockhash from the last [entry id](terminology.md#entry-id) of the block.

Reviewer 2: Fingerprint means something specific in cryptography. Just say `A unique number`

## block height

The number of [blocks](terminology.md#block) beneath the current block. The first block after the [genesis block](terminology.md#genesis-block) has height one.

## bootstrap validator

The server node ([validator](terminology.md#validator)) that produces the genesis (first) [block](terminology.md#block) of a block chain.

## BPF loader 

> The Solana program that owns and loads smart contract programs into validator memory.

Reviewer 2: This is not quite accurate, should be:
`The Solana program that owns and loads BPF smart contract programs, allowing the program to interface with the runtime.`

## confirmed block

> A grouping of transactions and other data ([block](terminology.md#block)) that has received a [supermajority](terminology.md#supermajority) of [ledger votes](terminology.md#ledger-vote) that matches the leader's.

Reviewer 2: this is probably unnecessary
`grouping of transactions and other data ([block](terminology.md#block))`

Reviewer 2: ```
A [block](terminology.md#block) that has received a [supermajority](terminology.md#supermajority) of [ledger votes](terminology.md#ledger-vote).
```

Author: tx...will change 'grouping' to 'record'.    any ideas on how to have a better non-circular definition?

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I was thinking the link would suffice here...

Author: yeah this may have been a little overkill...i'll think about this

## confirmed block

> A [block](terminology.md#block) that has received a [supermajority](terminology.md#supermajority) of [ledger votes](terminology.md#ledger-vote) that matches the leader's.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, last issue, I think
remove `that matches the leader's`
Sorry for the late reply, didn't catch your new commit somehow.

## instruction

The code that a [client](terminology.md#client) can include in a [transaction](terminology.md#transaction). 

> 

Reviewer 2: As mentioned, this is not really code. 

Please use
`The smallest unit of a [program](terminology.md#program) that a [client](terminology.md#client) can include in a [transaction](terminology.md#transaction). An instruction specifies which program it is calling, which accounts it wants to read or modify, and an additional data field serving as auxiliary input to the program. Within its processing code, an instruction may contain one or more [cross-program invocations](terminology.md#cross-program-invocation).`

Reviewer 2: I've updated this. Should be satisfactory.

Reviewer 2: ^

The code that interprets [instructions](terminology.md#instruction).

## program derived account (PDA)

> An account whose owner is a program and thus is not controlled by a private key like other accounts.   For example, associated token accounts are have a separate owner field which is the token program that controls debits to the account.

Reviewer: I think you can strike the example here

## smart contract

A program on a blockchain that can read and modify accounts over which it has control.

## sol

The [native token](terminology.md#native-token) of a Solana [cluster](terminology.md#cluster).

## Solana Program Library (SPL)

> A library of smart contracts on Solana such as spl-token that facilitates tasks such as creating and using tokens

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A library of programs on Solana such as spl-token that facilitates tasks such as creating and using tokens
```

## smart contract

A program on a blockchain. 

> 

Reviewer 2: A program on a blockchain that allows updates to accounts.

Reviewer 2: could you update?

Reviewer 2: ^

## token

A digitally transferable asset.

## tower BFT

> The Solana consensus mechanism.  A proof-of-history optimized version of byzantine fault tolerance (PBFT) so named because it acts as a 'watch tower' over the Solana network, assuring validators that any attempt to cheat the proof-of-history clock will be punished.

Reviewer 2: Where did you get this information from? I'm not sure this is true at all. Probably should remove the second sentence...

Author: I believe this term 'watchtower' came from the early writing of the founder or someone close to him and is the most succinct description of the Solana consensus mechanism i'm aware of.   See: https://u.today/solana-cracking-the-scalability-challenge-with-proof-of-history

I think it is helpful to have a clear definition of what the consensus mechanism is.   Agree?

Reviewer 2: I'm pretty sure that was a spin by the article writer...
tower is because you're building a PoH tower, I believe...

## validator

A full participant in a Solana network [cluster](terminology.md#cluster) that produces new [blocks](terminology.md#block).  A validator validates the transactions added to the [ledger](terminology.md#ledger)

## VDF

See [verifiable delay function](terminology.md#verifiable-delay-function).

## verifiable delay function (VDF)

> A function that Solana uses to encode the passage of time.   The Solana VDF takes a fixed amount of time to execute and produces a proof that it ran, which can then be verified in less time than it took to produce.

Reviewer: The previous definition was more correct IMO. The is no "Solana VDF".
